---
affilliation: UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN AT ANN ARBOR
end_date: '2024-05-19T12:00:00-04:00'
grant_num: R03OD034500
pi: LIU, JIE, WANG, JIEBIAO (contact)
title: Allele-specific analysis of human epigenome, transcriptome and high-resolution
  chromatin organization
---
The human genome has two alleles at each genetic locus, with one allele inherited from each parent. Allele- specificity has been widely observed and investigated across human transcriptome, epigenome and 3D chromatin organization respectively, as evidenced by the data collected from the GTEx project, the ENCODE project, and the 4DN project. However, the allele-level interplay among transcriptome, epigenome and 3D chromatin organization has not been systematically explored. In the proposal, we aim to leverage shared donors between these consortia and systematically investigate these connections at allele-level in many human tissue types. With the single cell datasets available from these donors, we will narrow down from tissue level to cell type level, and further interrogate these allele-specific cross-modality connections. In essential, our analysis seamlessly integrates two NIH Common Fund datasets, namely 4DN and GTEx datasets, and ENCODE datasets. With this integrated data source, biomedical researchers can easily navigate, browse, compare and investigate the high quality, high resolution, and comprehensive datasets regarding chromatin organization, regulatory elements, epigenomic status and transcriptional activity with allele-specificity and cell-type-specificity. Not only would this accomplishment have an enormous positive impact on the utility and usage of the Common Fund datasets, it would also help to promote open science and reproducible research in the areas of computational genomics and data science.