---
active: true
grant_num: U54OD036472
homepage: https://cfdeconnect.org/
icon: https://cfde-drc.s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/assets/img/icc-logo.png
label: The Integration and Coordination Center
layout: '@/layouts/Center.astro'
short_description: 'CONNECT: Collaborative Network for Nurturing Ecosystems of Common
  Fund Team Science'
short_label: ICC
---
The Collaborative Network for Nurturing Ecosystems of Common Fund Team Science (CONNECT) Integration and Coordination Center (ICC) is dedicated to revolutionizing biomedical research within the Common Fund Data Ecosystem (CFDE) through exceptional efficiency, transparency, and innovation. Led by Prof. Jake Chen at the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB), with support from Prof. Casey Greene, Prof. Sean Davis, Prof. Peipei Ping, and Prof. Wei Wang, our synergistic Administrative, Evaluation, and Sustainability Cores underpin the ICC's ability to fulfill its mission. The significance of the CONNECT ICC lies in its alignment of missions, goals, and efforts to drive transformative discoveries and applications within the CFDE. Through comprehensive operation guidelines and protocols, our Administrative Core, led by Prof. Chen, ensures effective coordination, tracking, and project management across CFDE-participating entities. This core spearheads the implementation of an Agile project management system, utilizing advanced collaboration tools like U-BRITE, to optimize communication, coordination, and collaboration among CFDE stakeholders. By fostering efficient operations and transparent communication, the Administrative Core promotes software- assisted agile project management methodology innovation and accelerates scientific progress. The Evaluation Core, led by Prof. Greene and Prof. Davis at the University of Colorado at Anschutz, is vital in driving continuous quality improvement within the CFDE. By establishing evaluation metrics aligned with CFDE principles and engaging with stakeholders, this core ensures the effectiveness and impact of CFDE activities. The Evaluation Core's innovative approaches, including developing a report generator and continuous engagement for feedback and improvement, drive the advancement of the CFDE and facilitate evidence-based decision-making. The Sustainability Core, led by Prof. Ping and supported by Prof. Wang at UCLA, addresses the long-term viability and reusability of CF program data and resources. Through the MATCH approach and the CFDE Digital Asset Repository Roadmap, this core promotes seamless data transitioning, maximizes data dissemination, and enhances community reuse. By developing best practices for data management, coordinating data transfer strategies, and identifying suitable repositories, the Sustainability Core ensures the preservation and accessibility of invaluable CF program data for future research and discoveries. Overall, our CONNECT ICC's innovation lies in its ability to harmoniously integrate the efforts of the Administrative, Evaluation, and Sustainability Cores. By fostering efficient operations, promoting continuous quality improvement, and ensuring data sustainability, the ICC drives transformative biomedical discoveries, facilitates collaborative research, and accelerates the impact of the CFDE. Through the expertise and dedication of our team, the CONNECT ICC is poised to help CFDE revolutionize the biomedical research landscape and advance the mission of the Common Fund.