---
active: true
grant_num: OT2OD037922
label: The Training Center
layout: ../../layouts/Centers.astro
short_description: Fostering Meaningful Use of Common Fund Data
short_label: TC
---
To help ensure that Common Fund Data Ecosystem (CFDE) data assets, data tools, and resources are findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR), the project will create a CFDE Training Center (TC) responsive to the needs of biomedical researchers and current and future CFDE data programs. The TC will serve as the central hub for training development, coordination, and evaluation across CFDE programs and data initiatives. Goals of the TC are to expand the Common Fund (CF) data userbase, enhance the confidence and complexity of dataset usage, and increase awareness of the CFDE and resources. Team ORAU proposes to accomplish with (1) training intentionally designed to address gaps in the training landscape, (2) outreach activities and a mentoring program designed to support the growing community of CF users, and (3) the establishment of a collaborative and supportive learning community. The TC will provide a dynamic syllabus tailored to meeting the needs of a diverse community of scientists and medical researchers at all experience levels, with focus on postgraduate students and early-stage investigators. The TC will design and deliver customized trainings and training tools to address both broad data skills needs and the customized needs of specific CFDE data initiatives and Data Coordinating Centers. Matching students and early career scientists with experienced bioinformaticians and CF data users, the CFDE Mentoring Program will provide technical and professional guidance to engage learners and encourage careers in bioinformatics and data sciences. The TC recruitment and outreach functions will focus on engaging a diverse and equitable set of trainers and participants. The learning community will be supported by internal processes and functions put in place to facilitate communication and collaboration, including a CFDE Trainers Working Group to share best practices and leverage shared resources, a Diversity Committee to ensure diversity, equity, inclusion and accessibility (DEIA) is embedded in all activities and processes, a CFDE Landing Page on the CFDE Portal providing a public gateway to CFDE training resources, and a CFDE Virtual Community of Learners providing learning support and guidance to all training participants as well as a platform for communication and engagement. Development of the TC will require in-depth landscape analysis to assess, identify, and address the training opportunities and needs of the CFDE community. The landscape analysis will include comprehensive gap analysis, examining current tools and processes and training content, systematic literature review, key informant interviews, CF research community survey, and other data gathering from National Institutes of Health (NIH) stakeholders and biomedical community at large. Ongoing evaluation and assessment of training activities will inform program enhancements and outcomes, achievements, and challenges will be reported out to the common fund and other CFDE coordinating centers. The TC will be developed and managed by a qualified and experienced team of training professionals and data scientists from Oak Ridge Associate Universities (ORAU) and BioData Sage LLC, working in close coordination with the CF and the CFDE stakeholder community. Project management processes and controls will ensure that the TC and affiliated training programs and engagement activities are appropriate, effective, and efficient. Program development and management will take an integrated flexible approach, coordinating closely with NIH and integrating feedback and activities from across the CFDE to ensure alignment in all areas.